[Music]
thanks for watching wood and shop I'm
Joshua Farnsworth I want to show you how
to make a simple shiplap joint so what
is the shiplap joint a ship ledge stiff
lap joint is essentially two rabbet
joints in opposition to each other to
create some strength there and it works
really well on the bottoms of like tool
tool chest drawers or anything where you
don't want to have the warping action of
a large panel and you want to keep it
from falling apart you can see here this
one has a nice bead put on it and I'll
show how to do that in the next video
but they hold together really nicely and
tightly when it's there inside of your
box so you can't even tell that there's
a ship lap joint in there from the back
so what I did was I simply cut one
rabbit here with a nice I put a fence
here and I use the shoulder plane and
you could just as easily use moving
Phyllis tur plane like this or a rabbit
plane like this I just happen to have
this shoulder plane tuned up and so
that's what I've used it's nice and
sharp here and so I will take these
holdfasts off and you can see the rabbit
that I've cut so what I need to do is
find my other piece you can see it's in
here and I made note of how I wanted of
which side I wanted the rabbit to go on
on each side so they'll go in opposition
like that so I will cut take this out
and place it there and what I did was I
set my marking gauge to make these the
same width so you can see I just
described this down I don't know what
that is a quarter inch or something
whatever however much you want them to
overlap for strength there
and just do this out of the way and I'll
just run this right along and what that
does that marking gauge line it gives me
like a guide of where to put the fence
and so I can also mark it right there so
that I can look on the ends when I'm
working if you can see that and then I
simply put it back here in on the edge
of the bench and put B fence up against
the marking gauge line that I had cut
with my gauge and line it right up smack
those holdfast down strong you can see
how how well they hold to work down
that's what that's what I like to hold
it down with when I'm doing rabbits like
this and then just start taking passes
keep it in mind to to not go like that
or like that but to keep it straight up
and down and if you want you can also
take a marking gauge and give yourself a
depth line on the first one so that you
can make sure that you don't go past
that but with this I'm just going to
when I feel like I'm getting close I
went about halfway on this one when I
feel like I'm getting close I'll just
take this here and measure it and when
they are level together then that means
that I'm all the way down to where I
need to be so this is a very easy joint
for beginners to use and it's great if
you want to start off making
boxes or tool chests or anything that
has a drawer bottom like that so let's
see how close I'm getting go a little
further so now I'll test this here you
can see it alright I'll set it here and
it looks like I'm close it's also a good
idea to check to make sure that you're
not playing that way or that way and you
can tell just by eyeballing it and I
think I need probably one or two more
passes and I'll be good it's vital that
you keep this fence tightened down
really well because if this starts to
slide then you'll have a rabbit joint
that will be skewed and you don't want
one of those and that's pretty close at
least for television so let's see if you
can see that hum piece that scared me
for a minute so you can see how nicely
that fits together there in the next
video I'll show you how to put a bead on
this joint so that doesn't look like
just the boring ugly line between two
boards if you found this video to be
helpful just be sure to click the blue
button up there to subscribe and thanks
for watching
if you're interested in learning
traditional woodworking with hand tools
visit my website at wood and shop comm
where you can find free video tutorials
buying guides and reviews make sure you
subscribe to my regular blog posts and
also check out my 10 steps for getting
started
enjoy